[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In this
series on foundational issues in mathematics,
we've been talking about algebra. Algebra is a
large subject characterized by the use of letters
to often represent numbers, and we've talked about
the usage of letters in equations as representing
unknown numbers. Today, we're going to look
at a different role for letters in algebra by
first of all having a look at some interesting
patterns formed from geometrical sequences.
Here are the squares. These are actually
literally geometrical squares, and we're
counting the areas of these squares: 1² =
1, 2² = 4, 3² = 9, and so on. These numbers
are important numbers in mathematics; they're
called the squares, and we can represent them
algebraically by the use of the term n². So the
nth square is n², which I remind you means n * n.
Here the letter n is representing a natural
number, in other words, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on.
Here's another famous family of special numbers:
the triangular numbers. Let's give them a name;
let's call the nth triangular number T_n.
Geometrically, how they arise is by stacking
up some balls in a triangular kind of pyramid:
there's one ball, there's three, there's six,
there's ten, there's fifteen, and we can continue.
At each stage, what we're doing to go from here to
here, say, is we're adding an extra row of balls
at the bottom so that T₃ there is reproduced here,
and then we add four more balls to get
T₄. Similarly, the T₄ is reproduced here,
and we're adding five new balls to get T₅.
Here are the triangular numbers: 1, 3, 6,
10, and 15, and so on. It's a little bit
less obvious now what a general formula
for the nth triangular number is, and
that's what we want—something just like
this but telling us what exactly that Tₙ
is in terms of n. Triangular numbers have
been studied since antiquity, and they
have lots of interesting properties.
Here is a way of analyzing patterns of numbers
in a more general way which applies also to other
interesting sequences or patterns. We write
down the sequence starting, say, with 1, 3,
6, 10—these are our triangular numbers—and
then above any two of them we write what the
difference is. The difference between 3 and
1 is 2, the difference between 6 and 3 is 3,
and so on. Or to put it another way, we write how
much we have to add to this one to get to the next
one, and we've seen already that these differences
increase linearly. They go through all the natural
numbers. That's made a little bit clearer
by actually deciding to start our triangular
numbers with zero. Then we have a difference
of one as well, which makes it aesthetically
a little bit more pleasant. So let's do that.
We could also examine this sequence, which is
just the sequence of all natural numbers in terms
of differences. Well, the difference between any
two of them is just one, so there's the line
of differences between the natural numbers,
and of course, the differences between these are
all zero, and that's sort of where things stop.
What about a formula for the nth triangular
number? Well, here's T₄, and another way of
thinking about what that is is it's 1 + 2 +
3 + 4. So there it is there as a sum. Another
way of representing this triangle of circles is to
represent it more with some boxes: 4, 3, 2, 1. If
we do it that way, then we can play the following
trick. We can take our copy of T₄ over here in
blue, and then we can take a second copy of it as
well in red, invert it, and put it on top to match
up and form a rectangle. In this case, a rectangle
of sides four and five. That's telling us that
2 * T₄ is 4 * 5, and that works in general. 2 * Tₙ
is going to be a rectangle with sides n and n + 1,
so the total area will be n * (n + 1), from which
we deduce that Tₙ is equal to n * (n + 1) / 2. So
here's another use of letters in algebra to allow
us to write formulas for patterns. The n here is
not representing an unknown number so much as a
general number, and it's allowing us to express
an arithmetical fact that's valid not just for one
triangular number but for any triangular number.
In fact, this formula is an
important formula because it's
directly connected with this kind of
arithmetic sequence. In other words,
we can interpret that little computation we made
about Tₙ as a formula for this arithmetic series:
1 + 2 + 3 + all the way up to n. The sum of
all the numbers from 1 to n, which is just the
number of balls in the nth triangular number,
is n * (n + 1) / 2. That's our formula for Tₙ.
This kind of formula is sometimes a little bit
ambiguous, and so we mathematicians like to
introduce a more precise notation for talking
about sums. This is the summation notation,
represented by this capital Greek letter Sigma
(Σ) for sum. So here's our convention: instead
of writing 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5, we'll simply write
the sum from k = 1 to 5 of k. So this expression
right here means this by definition. Here's a more
general example: the sum of all the numbers from 1
to n, 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 all the way up to n - 1 and up
to n. That sum is now represented in the summation
notation by this sign, the sigma. That stands for
sum. This index k is telling us what, first of
all, we're summing and what the range of summation
is. k is running from 1 to n, and we're summing k.
The beauty of this summation notation is that it's
quite flexible and allows us to talk about other
kinds of sums. For example, 1² + 2² + 3² + 4² +
5² could be written more economically as the sum
k = 1 to 5 of k². Here's the general formula that
extends this. I'll just give it to you for now;
we'll have a look at the proof later on.
The sum of all the squares from 1 up to n,
so the sum k = 1 to n of k² is n * (n + 1) * (2n +
1) / 6. So if n happened to be five, then we would
have a five here, a six here, an eleven here,
the sixes would cancel, and we would get 55.
This last sum that we looked at, the sum
of all the squares, can also be studied in
terms of a table of differences. It's also quite
interesting. The differences between the squares
are all the odd numbers: 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and so
on. Further differences are all two and then zero,
so that's relatively easy. But we can also
extend this table downwards as long as we
have a starting point. So suppose we start with
zero. Then this line is going to be the line of
the sums of squares. This 55 here represents 1²
+ 2² + all the way up to 5². That's the number we
already calculated. So here are the sums of
squares. That's a more complicated sequence
from the sequence of squares obtained by
going down in this table of differences.
This is just the beginning of
talking about patterns of numbers,
and next time we're going to look at some
more patterns to give us some more practice
in trying to understand geometrical patterns
arithmetically and using algebra to encode the
results. So I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]